TOPICS COVERED (DATA VISUALIZATION USING MATPLOTLIB & SEABORN)
Introduction to Data Visualization

The training session began with an introduction to Data Visualization, an essential step in Data Science and Machine Learning. Learned that data visualization is the graphical representation of data using charts, graphs, and plots, making it easier to understand patterns, trends, relationships, and outliers within datasets.

The trainer explained that before building a Machine Learning model, data visualization helps in exploring the dataset, identifying errors, detecting missing values, and understanding the distribution of features.

Introduction to Matplotlib

Studied Matplotlib, one of the most widely used Python libraries for creating static, interactive, and animated visualizations.

Learned how to import the library:

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Understood the basic structure of creating plots, including defining the figure, plotting data, adding titles, labels, legends, and displaying the graph using plt.show().

Creating Line Charts

Learned how to create Line Charts to visualize continuous data and observe trends over time.

Practiced:

Plotting single-line graphs
Plotting multiple lines
Changing line styles
Adding markers
Customizing line width
Setting titles and axis labels
Adding legends and gridlines

Discussed real-world applications such as stock market trends, temperature analysis, and monthly sales reports.

Creating Bar Charts

Studied the use of Bar Charts for comparing values across different categories.

Performed practical exercises on:

Vertical bar charts
Horizontal bar charts
Grouped bar charts
Customizing bar width and labels

Used sample datasets to compare sales across different products and regions.

Creating Pie Charts

Learned how Pie Charts represent proportional data.

Practiced:

Displaying percentage values
Exploding slices
Changing colors
Adding labels and titles

Used examples such as market share analysis and student grade distribution.

Creating Histograms

Studied Histograms to understand the frequency distribution of numerical data.

Learned how histograms help identify:

Normal distribution
Skewness
Data spread
Frequency of observations

Created histograms for age, salary, and exam score datasets.

Creating Scatter Plots

Learned how Scatter Plots are used to analyze relationships between two numerical variables.

Performed practical exercises to visualize:

Height vs Weight
Study Hours vs Marks
Experience vs Salary

Discussed how scatter plots help identify correlations before building Machine Learning models.

Introduction to Seaborn

Received an introduction to Seaborn, a Python visualization library built on top of Matplotlib.

Learned that Seaborn provides more attractive and informative statistical graphics with minimal coding.

Imported Seaborn using:

import seaborn as sns

Explored different built-in datasets available in Seaborn for practice.

Creating Statistical Plots Using Seaborn

Studied several visualization techniques using Seaborn.

Practiced creating:

Count Plot
Box Plot
Violin Plot
Pair Plot
Distribution Plot
Heatmap

Learned when each visualization should be used during Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA).

Correlation Analysis Using Heatmaps

Studied correlation matrices to understand relationships between numerical features.

Created Heatmaps to visualize positive, negative, and weak correlations among variables.

Learned how highly correlated features affect Machine Learning models and why feature selection is important.

Customizing Graphs

Learned various graph customization techniques including:

Changing figure size
Setting colors
Adding titles
Labeling axes
Rotating labels
Adding legends
Displaying grids
Saving figures as image files

Understood how proper visualization improves data interpretation and presentation.

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) Using Visualizations

Performed basic Exploratory Data Analysis using visualization techniques.

Analyzed datasets to:

Detect missing values
Identify outliers
Observe feature distributions
Compare different categories
Analyze relationships between variables
Draw meaningful conclusions from graphical representations

Discussed the importance of visualization before feature engineering and model building.

Hands-on Practical Session

Completed practical exercises using Matplotlib and Seaborn, including:

Creating line charts for monthly sales.
Comparing product sales using bar charts.
Visualizing market share through pie charts.
Plotting score distributions using histograms.
Creating scatter plots for feature comparison.
Generating box plots to identify outliers.
Drawing heatmaps to analyze feature correlations.
Performing exploratory data analysis on a sample dataset.
Customizing graphs with titles, labels, legends, and colors.
Saving visualizations for reports and presentations.

Successfully executed all visualization programs using Jupyter Notebook and Visual Studio Code.

KEY LEARNINGS
Understood the importance of data visualization in Machine Learning.
Learned to create different types of graphs using Matplotlib.
Explored statistical visualizations using Seaborn.
Understood how graphs help identify trends, distributions, relationships, and outliers.
Learned to analyze feature correlations using heatmaps.
Performed Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) using graphical techniques.
Improved skills in customizing and presenting professional-quality visualizations.
Gained practical experience in interpreting datasets visually before model development.
TOOLS USED
Python 3.x
Matplotlib
Seaborn
Pandas
NumPy
Jupyter Notebook
Visual Studio Code (VS Code)
Google Colab
TASK FOR TOMORROW

Study Data Preprocessing and Data Cleaning using Pandas. Learn how to detect and handle missing values, remove duplicate records, identify and treat outliers, convert data types, encode categorical variables, perform feature scaling and normalization, and prepare datasets for Machine Learning models. Practice preprocessing a real-world dataset and understand why clean, high-quality data is essential for building accurate AI and ML models.
